Please welcome David Wright,
Mac OS X Applications Technology Manager.
Thank you.
Welcome to session 127, Cocoa Update.
I know they've got a lot of
material to tell you about
since you last were using Cocoa,
so without delay, I'm just going to bring
Ali Ozer on stage.
Please welcome the manager
of the Cocoa framework team.
Good afternoon.
It's sort of late, I guess,
but not much more left of the day.
Okay, so I am Ali Ozer,
the manager of the Cocoa Frameworks.
Yes.
So today's topics are we're going to
talk about the state of Cocoa today.
That's just a few minutes.
And then we're going to talk
about what's new in Cocoa,
basically what has changed since
the last time we were together,
which was last WWDC.
And then we're also going
to talk a few minutes about
some of the upcoming changes,
things we have planned
for the next few months,
next few, you know,
the next few releases.
So first,
a few slides about the state of Cocoa.
So, what has been happening?
Well, the big thing,
as you might imagine, was Aqua.
AppKit is all user interface classes,
a lot of user interface widgets and
abstractions and helper classes.
And implementing Cocoa was
a big task for us.
I think we're very happy to deliver
it in Macworld and have a great demo.
And since then,
we're obviously doing a lot
more enhancements and polish,
and that's been a big task for us,
and a big part of this talk
will be about the Aqua.
We also have been continuing to integrate
better with the components in Mac OS X.
Last time we were together,
we talked about how we integrated
with the new kernel and DPS going
away and Quartz in its place,
and since then,
Finder has been more established.
We now have the new Finder
instead of Workspace.
The Carbon APIs are more
established and the Carbon,
there are more Carbon applications
and stuff in the system.
So we've been updating the
Cocoa frameworks to work
more with these elements.
We've also been implementing
new features based on feedback
and various other sources,
some features that
we'll talk about today.
And we've obviously been also fixing
bugs and improving performance,
obviously changing the system,
moving components,
putting new components in introduces
bugs and performance issues,
and we've been constantly battling those.
OK.
So one thing to note about
Cocoa is that in Mac OS X,
in DP4,
Cocoa is being used in a large and
an increasing number of applications.
So here is some of them.
I mean, as you know, Mail, TextEdit,
Grab, some of the old favorites, Preview,
Address Book is a new one,
which lets you manipulate your address
books to be used in Mail and other cases.
And also notice Image Capture.
If you were at Mac OS X Keynote,
Bertrand's Keynote,
Christine showed you the Image Capture
framework and she showed you the app
that uses the Image Capture framework
and she took a picture of you all.
And the Image Capture app is also,
for instance, a Cocoa app that uses the
Image Capture framework,
which is a brand new framework available
to Cocoa and Carbon applications.
In the administration side,
we have Assistant, multiple users,
that's a new app, and Terminal,
Installer, old stuff.
And developer applications,
we have the new project builder,
which is a Cocoa app.
Obviously the WebObjects project
builder and interface builder
are all Cocoa applications.
OK.
One interesting topic is Objective-C,
what happens to
Objective-C moving forward.
And as you might imagine,
and you've probably seen this and noticed
this in the various developer previews,
we are adding new APIs and we are
adding new features and we are exposing
them in both Java and Objective-C.
So we have not stopped
improving Objective-C.
and we do intend to support
Objective-C for the foreseeable future.
So if you want to write Objective-C,
you can.
And as you can imagine,
internally at Apple,
we're writing applications
in both Java and Objective-C.
We both obviously want to be banging
on both stacks and both APIs,
and we want to improve both.
So internally,
we're using both APIs to write apps.
And it's possible to write large,
big applications, full-featured,
using both of these languages.
Okay, so now on to what's new in Cocoa.
Here we're just going to go
through some of the changes,
the new APIs, and so on and so forth.
This is going to be the bulk of the talk.
Okay, we're going to go through changes
in Aqua and changes that having the
finder in the system have brought us.
And then some of the changes brought
on with the Quartz and the OpenGL,
the new graphic subsystems in the system.
And also the Umbrella frameworks,
which you've heard about in
some of the other sessions.
And then we'll also cover a few of
the other new interesting features
that we've added since last WWDC.
So Aqua.
If you were at Don Lindsey's
talk on Monday,
you heard all about the
design philosophy behind Aqua,
and you saw some of the really
deep thought that went into
some of those elements in Aqua.
And it is the new user
experience for Mac OS X.
It is the user experience.
It's not very tweedical, changeable,
but we hope to make it great.
Aqua impacts the user
experience in multiple ways.
It changes the look and
feel of existing controls,
and also their sizes and
layouts in some cases.
It also introduces some new interactions.
It changes some of the
way menus are laid out,
and so on.
So the changes in the
look and layout includes,
for instance, a new system font.
The new system font that's used
in Aqua is Lucida Grande 13 point.
And so that's the font you've been
seeing in all of the applications.
There's obviously a
new background pattern.
A lot of you know that.
Can you see it up there?
There it is, magnified,
our background pattern.
This is, you know,
in the backgrounds of windows and so on,
in the backgrounds of menus.
We have larger controls.
Now, turns out controls are not taller,
but in some cases they're wider.
Because the buttons, for instance,
have longer end caps,
so the cancel and okay buttons
both end up being somewhat wider.
But in most cases they're not taller
than they were in the platinum space.
They also have updated
inter-control spacing.
Some of the spacing rules between
controls have been updated,
fine-tuned, and you can read about these
in the Aqua layout guidelines.
Another thing we've
changed is the layout.
Another thing we've changed is
the window frames and shadows.
Don't look at the cat,
look at the borders, and you can see,
you know,
there's nice little buttons and so on,
and we've introduced those into Aqua.
And also the semi-transparent
inactive titles.
And also semi-transparent
menus are also new in Aqua.
In the interaction area,
we've changed a bunch of things.
For instance, the menu layout.
Currently the application menu
has application-centric elements,
file menu, edit menu, etc.
So some of the elements have moved around
from where they were in the application.
From where they were in
Mac OS X server and Mac OS 9.
We have pulsating buttons.
I couldn't make PowerPoint pulse.
I didn't try very hard, so imagine.
Sheets.
We have sheets,
and you've seen demos of those.
We'll go over those today.
We have drawers.
We have dynamic resizing.
As you resize that window,
the contents reflow on the fly.
Similarly with split views,
as you move the split bar up
and down in a splitter pane,
the both sides redraw
dynamically on the fly.
And we finally, of course, have the dock,
which is a very visible design
element of the user experience.
So some of these changes
are automatically picked
up by the applications.
You don't have to do any work for those.
For instance, pulsating buttons.
If you had a button which was set to
be the default button in a window,
it will now pulsate as opposed
to draw a darker ring around it.
The new system font is also picked up.
If you are correctly
using the message font,
which used to be charcoal,
it will now be lucida grande,
except the size is not
automatically picked up.
So that's one element
that's not automatic.
The dynamic resizing of windows,
split bars, that's all automatic.
Most views implement draw rect.
Most views are quite proper in
how they refresh themselves,
so dynamic resizing just works.
And window frames and shadows, too.
We showed those window frames.
For the most part, most apps do not care
about the window frames.
They're just focused on the content,
so things should work fine.
Some of the changes are not so automatic.
New control sizes and layout.
If the buttons have gotten wider,
as you know,
nibs don't automatically pick those up,
so your buttons might
get clipped at the edges.
Whoops.
The menu layout is not
automatically picked up,
so the quit items and stuff
don't move to the first menu.
And sheets and drawers are new
features that you have to take explicit
advantage of for your app to use them.
But Interface Builder can help.
So we have added a feature in the
Interface Builder where it will
update your nib to a certain degree.
And it helps with the menu layout,
it helps with control sizing and layout,
and it also helps with the fonts.
You can find this feature in this menu.
You can't miss it,
because the menu is quite large.
Anyway, but there's an item that says
Apply Layout Guidelines to Window.
I do want to show a quick demo of this.
You can switch to demo one, please.
Okay, so let me go into the nibs.
Okay, so what I'm going to do is I'm
just going to open a few nibs,
show you how they
looked in the old world,
and show you what happens
to them when they're edited.
One of them is this nib here.
Ignore this other title bar.
This is being opened in image program.
So this is the way things used
to look in Mac OS X server.
It's been a long time since
some of us have seen this,
but this is one of the
preferences panels.
I'll now open this in Interface Builder.
So as you can see,
when you open it in Interface Builder,
It already ends up doing
some of the work for you.
Lucida is used where charcoal
was being used because that's
already set to be the message font.
However,
notice that this button looks a bit tight
compared to what Aqua would like to see.
So if we go to the interface builder,
that big menu,
say Apply Layout Guidelines to Window,
the window will grow.
Now one thing it doesn't
actually do is grow the window,
but the contents grow.
If you make the window bigger,
you'll see that the Start button is
now a more aesthetically pleasing,
wider end cap type button.
The text has changed to
be 13 point or larger.
And these two radio buttons
have spaced themselves a little
apart to fit the guidelines.
So that's one case.
Let's close that one.
Another case here is
this services controller.
Again, let's open.
This is the way it looked.
This is, I think, again,
in the preferences panel.
And if we open
This one turns out to be actually
look almost good enough even
in Aqua without any changes.
You'll notice again
the button is clipped.
Again, if we go ahead and say
Apply UI Guidelines,
things just grow.
Now notice that this command does
do a pretty good job in some cases,
but in other cases where
alignments are involved,
it will not go ahead and
necessarily keep the alignments.
That's because it doesn't know that these
two elements are related to each other.
So in those cases, you know,
do that or whatever you would like.
In some cases it will actually be worse,
but it is pretty good in that it fixes
fonts and a lot of other subtle things
that would be very hard to get to.
So let me also open one more here.
There you go, there's a sound panel.
This one opens up and the sliders end
up getting clipped a lot because they
got a lot fatter since last time.
Apply UI guidelines and you notice
all these end up looking good.
This button gets clipped a bit.
Again, a little tweaking.
We'll fix that.
One thing that this does is,
if it sees message font at 12 point,
it will fix it up to message font at 13.
Another hack we added in there
is if it sees Helvetica at 12,
it will actually change that
to message font at 13 point.
Because a lot of old nibs,
which were created before we
added the dynamic font feature,
tended to use Helvetica at 12.
And we finally said, 99% of the cases,
the person really meant message font.
So we're changing those as well.
But if you, for instance,
explicitly use charcoal or if you
explicitly use some other font,
those will not be updated.
Or if you use message font at 20 point,
for instance, it will remain 20 point.
Okay, can we switch back to slides,
please?
Slides?
Thank you.
OK.
So one other thing to note
here is we have this concept of
platform-specific resources where
you can have the same Nib file,
but optimized for one
platform or the other.
To differentiate
Mac OS X from Mac OS X Server,
we have added the use of
these prefixes or suffixes.
So if you, for instance,
have a sketch document that nib,
a Nib file,
which is your generic Nib file,
if you want to have a version that's
optimized for Mac OS X Server,
you could add the
-Macintosh suffix onto that,
and it will be opened.
It'll be used correctly
on Mac OS X Server.
So this is of interest to
applications where you're
compiling for both platforms,
and you want to maintain
resources for both.
And these can even coexist
in the resources directory,
obviously, because of this naming scheme.
Okay, so drawers.
Now let's talk about some of the
drawer features and some of the
API that you can use to control them.
So drawers are views that pop in
and out from the sides of a window.
And now you will see one of
the wonders of PowerPoint.
Here's a mail window,
and there's a drawer.
Would you like to see that again?
Drawer.
Okay, so PowerPoint turns out to have
some hidden nice little features.
So,
The drawers are attached
to the parent window.
So they're like a separate
window on the side,
but when you move the parent window,
they move with it.
And they're implemented
as a subclass of NSObject.
So they're not a window or a panel.
They're abstracted away from that.
So the commonly used APIs in
sDrawer are these guys.
You can imagine that you want
to have an API to open a drawer,
close a drawer,
and these are target action methods.
So you would connect it to
your button or whatever menu
item that controls the drawer.
You can also tell a drawer
to open on a certain edge,
left, right, bottom, whatever.
You can set the parent window,
set the content view.
These basically determine where a drawer
is attached and what the contents are.
You can also set a preferred edge,
so when open is called,
this indicates which side
the drawer should open on.
And you can also ask for the state
and ask for which edge it's on.
Now notice that drawer can
actually be in three states,
closed, open, and in transition.
And that's because it actually takes
a few minutes to open the drawer.
It takes time to open,
and during that time your
app can still be active.
The user can still be doing things.
Now it turns out Interface Builder
does provide support for drawers.
So you don't actually
have to use parent window,
content window type methods.
You can actually hook these up in
Interface Builder to your drawer,
which is actually pretty good.
And this drawer also has delegate.
The delegate methods tell you basically
when the drawer is about to open,
when it did open, when it will open.
That way if you have a drawer
but you don't want to populate
the contents at launch time,
you can wait until the drawer is about
to be opened and populate at that point.
So pretty straightforward delegate APIs.
Okay, so now we'll talk a
little bit about sheets.
Sheets are the document
model panels on a window.
And you saw the demos.
It does a little genie
effect to come down.
And it's also attached to the window.
Now,
the most interesting aspect of sheets,
and the hardest as well,
is the fact that they are document model.
What this means is when that window,
when a window has a sheet on it,
you can still interact with the
other windows in the application.
You can even bring down sheets
in other windows and so on.
And this goes against the model,
the modality that we have introduced
in NS application and throughout
the system all these years.
Suddenly you're not blocking
all the events to other windows.
So one of the implications
of this is run model method.
You know,
when you say run model this panel,
run model this alert and so on,
it now needs to return immediately
so that other sheets can be brought
down and other things would happen.
Otherwise you get into a stack-based
situation where one panel is down,
another panel is down,
but if you cancel this panel,
your stack is sort of screwed up
and you don't know what to do.
So the run model has
to return immediately.
And at a later point a callback
needs to be sent to tell you that
the panel has been dismissed.
And that's the model we
move towards with sheets.
So DP4 has the new API to support sheets.
The APIs are in three
separate categories,
and there might be a few more APIs we're
adding going forward from here.
The APIs that are currently there
are APIs for the safe panel,
which also apply to the open panel,
I believe.
Functions to run alert
panels doc-modally.
So these are the simple three, two,
or one-button alert panels.
And API in this application
to run any window doc-modally.
So you can have any panel
and run it modally this way.
and it'll be attached to your window,
come down as a sheet, and so on.
So, as an example,
I'm going to show you the
Safe Panel API and explain
to you how this one works.
The Safe Panel API... Now,
if you remember the old Safe Panel API,
it used to say "run model
for directory and file" and
basically you gave the first two
arguments that you would see here.
Here you see "path" and "name". Now we've
added four more arguments to the method.
arguments are actually
fairly straightforward.
Model for window,
that is the window that the
panel should be attached to.
The model delegate is the object
that wants to hear about that panel.
And the did end selector is the selector
that will be sent to that model delegate.
The model delegate is a temporary
one-time delegate that gets created,
and the only message it will
get is the did end selector
when the panel is dismissed.
So that's all those two are.
Finally, we've added an argument that
represents arbitrary user info
that you can pass in there.
It can be a struct,
it can be a dictionary,
it can be anything you want,
it can be null.
Sometimes we found it's good
to carry state between this
method and the did end selector,
and this is a convenient way to do that.
So what happens is this
will put up the sheet,
and that's it.
When the panel is dismissed,
the did end selector you
specified will be called.
Now note that the did end
selector can be called anything.
The interesting thing about
this selector is it's signal.
It's signature,
meaning which arguments it takes.
It can take a sheet.
It takes a sheet,
basically the sheet that
you're running modal for.
It takes the return code,
that's whether it was canceled
or okayed or whatever.
It also takes the context info that
you passed in in the first place.
Now the reason that the selector can
be named anything and you specify this
is sometimes in some context you might
bring up save panel three different ways,
and each one should really have
a different did end indication
so that you don't have to do ifs
Now the alert panel API is
also like the old one,
except it's grown a few arguments.
We also moved some of
the arguments around.
If you've ever used NS -- whatever
it's called -- run model alert or
alert run model or one of those.
It used to have the title,
then the message, then the buttons,
and then the arguments to the message.
So it was sort of a -- the
arguments were intermixed.
We've moved the arguments around.
But basically the title is
the title of your alert.
The three buttons -- default button,
alternate button,
other button -- appear next.
Then you get the dock window
and the modal delegate,
and the will end and did end selectors.
In this case we have two selectors.
One is shown to you before
the alert is dismissed.
The other one is sent to you
when the alert is dismissed.
And finally we have a context
just like the other case.
And then at the end we have the message,
a format string,
followed by all the arguments
like in the olden days.
It's just we moved those to the
end and they're all together now.
OK, so the implications of Sheets goes
beyond just adding these methods,
it turns out.
What do you do in methods which
have traditionally put up panels
to get a response from the
user and then return yes or no?
And those include window should close.
For instance,
when the user hits the close button,
typically the delegate
gets window should close.
Window should close puts up a panel,
the user responds save or don't save,
and finally when the user is done,
that all returns and that
method returns yes or no,
indicating that the
window is safe to close.
And application should
terminate is another one.
Now these guys, if they run Sheets,
the Sheets will return immediately,
and these guys, they don't know whether
to return yes or no,
because the operation is still ongoing.
Okay, so currently the thought is
if a panel needs to be put up,
put up the panel and return no,
indicating do not close the window,
do not terminate the application.
Then in the callback, finally,
once the user is done with that panel,
[Transcript missing]
Now, in DP3 we had added some sheet APIs,
and we are deprecating those.
They are there in DP4,
but you should not use them.
They are marked that
way in the header file.
These are the runModalForWindow
relative to window APIs,
which assume a modal, you call it,
and then it returns type behavior.
So don't use those methods.
The APIs we had for a long time,
the runModal APIs, runModalForWindow,
those are going to stay.
Those will still run
modal panels app-modally.
It appears in the middle of the screen.
That's like the olden days,
and there are still cases
where those are appropriate.
So those APIs will stay
and you can use them.
Now, one thing to note is in DP4,
NSDocument does not make
full use of the new APIs.
Although NSDocument will
put up sheets and so on,
it doesn't make use of a
lot of the newest features,
so in some cases you
might notice odd behavior.
The good news is we are fixing that bug,
so if you have a NSDocument-based app,
it will be fixed in the next drop.
Okay, so let me demo sheets for you now.
Whoa!
Okay.
Let's quit that.
Okay, so for one thing,
let me show you in the
context of TextEdit some of
the subtleties of Sheets.
Close this.
Okay, so let me open a document.
I will go.
Open a release note.
So now I'm going to go ahead
and attempt to save this.
Note that this is an HTML file,
and TextSet does not save an HTML file.
So when you try to do this,
you get this warning.
Can't save HTML.
Should we save as RTF?
So this is like the beginning of
a chain of these doc model panels.
Note that while this is up,
I can go in here,
and I can continue typing.
I can even try to close this window,
which will put up another panel.
Anyway, for instance, down here,
if I say, supply a new name, okay,
this now will drop a save
panel for me to type in.
And while this guy,
I can still type and do other things in.
And here I can type some file name.
For instance, I can type a file name that
it won't be able to save in,
because it's in slash.
and it will put up another alert
telling me couldn't save as test.rtf.
During this whole time,
these other windows are accessible.
I can bring up new windows and so on.
So basically,
you can see that there's a chain
of calls here that are happening.
I will show you this as an example in
the context of a simpler application now.
Okay, actually, open a project.
Okay, here we have a simple example.
Let me actually run it for you.
So here's our simple example.
This example lets me type,
and then it lets me save as.
So this is basically a modal panel,
but it's doc modal because I can bring
up an about panel while that's up.
And if I try to save it
to an illegal location,
it will tell me that it couldn't save,
and it will let me try again by
bringing up the save panel again.
So I'll just show you the
code for this little example.
Okay, other than the administrator
at the beginning,
we basically have the Save As method,
and this one creates a save panel,
it sets the required file type,
and then it just begins
sheets for directory.
That's it.
And as you can see,
it's fairly straightforward.
It runs modally for the window,
specifies self,
and the selector is End Save Sheet.
That's it.
So when the save panel is done,
this method will be called.
So, and there's this method here.
So this method is pretty straightforward.
If the code is OK,
meaning the user did not cancel,
this just simply gets the file name out
of the save panel and attempts to save.
This is just a local method we
have which attempts to save,
returns yes or no.
If the save fails,
we go ahead and we put up an alert
panel and we say couldn't save,
try again, cancel.
And here we specify as
a selector another one,
and can't save alert.
And this method itself,
if the OK button is pressed in the alert,
goes back to call save as,
which is basically the
thing that started this.
So as you can see,
instead of having what would
traditionally be a large method here,
it gets broken up into three pieces with
the callbacks providing the continuation.
OK.
So can we go back to slides, please?
Pattern Colors.
Another thing we've
added is Pattern Colors.
As you know, we've added the Pattern
Background support,
and Quartz also has
facilities for patterns,
so we've decided to bring the
Pattern feature into NSColor as
a publicly available feature.
So basically,
you get NSColor instances which,
when painting,
use patterns instead of solid colors.
To support this,
we've added a new color space,
the NSPatternColor space,
and we've added two new methods:
the ColorWithPatternImage
and PatternImage.
So you give it an NSImage,
no matter what kind of image, PDF, JPEG,
TIFF, and it creates an NSColor for you,
and you can also ask for its pattern.
Now,
one thing to note about pattern colors,
and this has always
been true of NS colors,
but I think it's good to
repeat this every few years.
Pattern colors do not have
traditional components like red,
green, blue.
What this means,
if you have a pattern color and
you ask for the red component,
that is an error,
because it just does not
have a red component.
In the pattern color space,
the only component is the pattern image.
So, if you have some color,
and if you don't know
where that color has been,
and you want to be robust,
you should convert that color to
the calibrated RGB color space,
if you want to get the RGB,
and then ask for its red component.
Note that that call might return null,
meaning this color cannot
be represented in RGB,
in which case you should do
whatever is appropriate with
the component you want to do.
You should use black,
or you should just use some other color.
And this is just good
programming practice with colors.
And so far, we have this, of course,
with system colors,
which are also not traditional.
They're not traditional RGB colors.
CMYK is even, with CMYKs,
you can get into this case.
We've also added the
concept of a control tint.
As you notice,
the buttons are that lovely blue
when they're active or pulsating.
And the question might come up,
if we want to change that blue a bit,
if we change the tint or whatever,
what should you do if you want
to have your own controls which
are not based on NSButton?
Well,
instead of using NSColors explicitly,
we've added the concept of color tints,
and there's two of them.
The default color tint,
which represents all the blues
that are around the system,
and the clear control tint,
which is also used for some controls,
which appear clear.
So basically,
you'd set a button's color by
using one of these two values.
And similarly, if you wanted to get the
NSColor corresponding to a tint,
you would call this NSColor method,
which will return to
you that shade of blue,
which then you can use to go ahead
and create other controls or whatever.
Now note that this last
method is actually not in DP4,
so it's going to come
as soon as possible.
So the font panel,
just a few words about that.
The font panel now provides
multiple panels in it,
multiple panes,
and it allows you to manage your
favorites and manage collections.
And we don't have any APIs in place yet,
but we're thinking that we might
at some point add APIs to let
applications manage or add collections
to the font panel dynamically.
And one other thing to note
about this font panel is that
it no longer has a set button,
so it's immediate
action on your document.
We were not sure of this change at
first as to how it would behave,
but it seems to behave very well.
It's zippy and it makes sense,
so I think it's going
to be kept that way.
The Safe Panel also has some
new APIs and some changes.
One of the big changes is that
when it now pops up by default,
it's small.
We call that the simple mode,
or the unexpanded mode.
There's a new API that tells you whether
the Safe Panel is expanded or not.
And there's also a delegate
API that tells you it's about to
expand or it's about to collapse.
And this would let you maybe do more
sophisticated things to the Safe Panel,
like add more accessory views
or do something if you know
that it's about to expand.
There's obviously also the
API that we showed you earlier
for the new DocModel behavior.
Okay, so I'm going to show you the
Font and Save panels now.
Demo, thank you.
Okay, so let's close this window.
Okay, so first the font panel.
There's the font panel,
and you'll notice that there's
a pop-up in here which lets you
specify collections and so on.
Once if I select a font here, Palatino,
30 add to favorites.
Go to my favorites.
Now I have two because
I already added one earlier.
I can go back to the fonts.
I can choose another font,
New York Regular, add to favorites.
It will be in my favorites.
And here by one click,
I'm basically selecting that font.
It's at a certain font size,
certain family, certain face.
We also have the collections.
I have the old fonts
collection by default.
I can add a new collection.
And let's say I call it Nice Fonts.
I can go ahead and
choose fonts from here.
Palatino, add it in there.
New York, add it in there.
Helvetica, add it in there.
So when we go back to the fonts pane,
all fonts gives me everything.
Nice Fonts gives me basically
a subset that I've chosen.
And it's a good way to
categorize your fonts,
especially if you happen to have
Now, I said I was going to
demo the Save Panel,
but I think you've already
seen the Save Panel enough.
There's the Save Panel.
You can expand it.
There you go.
That's the big version.
And that's the small version.
One thing to note in the big version is
that there's an Add to Favorites feature.
So if I go ahead and, for some reason,
let's say I want to go System,
Documentation, Developer,
I can add that to the Favorites.
It now starts appearing
in my favorite places.
So that's just like the Font Panel,
allows you to group the things
you like to go to often.
It's actually,
we also have recent places,
so you can always get to a
place you've visited recently.
So that's it for the Save Panel.
I was thinking I should also show
you one more thing while I'm here.
So let's write Hello World.
Let's give ourselves a nice big font.
Let's even maybe even make it bold.
Let's bring up the color panel.
That's one panel we
haven't shown you before.
So if I obviously change
the color and drag,
that does what you expect.
I talked about pattern colors earlier.
If you go to the system color list,
you'll notice that some
colors are now patterns,
because the control color and
also a window background color,
which appears here,
are actually that pattern that you
see in the backgrounds of windows.
If I choose that color,
by dragging on top of my text,
it now starts drawing with the pattern.
As you can imagine, no code changes.
I don't know if you can see that,
but you can certainly see this.
So basically,
most well-behaved code should
start adopting and using patterns,
no problem.
Sketch also, for instance,
turns out to use patterns very well.
There will turn out to be
some problems in some cases.
For instance,
the RTF spec does not let you
store patterns for colors,
so if you save this to RTF, read it back,
the patterns will be gone.
But anyway, again, in some uses of text,
this might be fairly
handy to have patterns.
You can see that patterns
pop up like this.
OK, that's it for that.
Slides, please.
Okay, Finder interaction.
Now let's talk about some of the new
features added because of the presence
of Finder and some more sophisticated
interaction with the system.
Reopen events, app packaging, Info.plist,
and icons are what I'm
going to talk about here.
So reopen events.
As you know, in the old Mac OS,
One of the problems that new users
would get into was they would close
the last document in an application,
then they might switch
to another application,
switch back, and although the menu bar
would change to indicate they
were in the new application,
they might not know they were in
the new application because there
was no open window to indicate this.
And this was solved in Mac OS by
adding this concept of a reopen event.
Whenever you go back into an application,
the application receives
this Apple event,
which indicates to the app,
you're being reactivated,
do something appropriate.
So, Cocoa applications on 10
will receive this event.
We obviously take care of it,
package it in some other format for you,
and one thing we do is we send
it to you in this delegate
method for an application.
Applications should handle reopen.
Has visible windows.
So,
the idea with this is you implement it
to do something custom in the case of
reopening documents or reactivating.
The Has Visible Windows flag
tells you whether there are any
visible windows on the screen.
So if you implemented this,
probably what you would do is
if Has Visible Windows is no,
you would go ahead and
open a new document.
Or you might choose,
if your documents were heavyweight,
instead to put up an About panel
or a new document creation panel.
It's up to you.
If you do not implement this method,
or if you implement this
method and return Yes,
which means you're not handling it,
the application should handle it,
then we will simply call the
application Open Untitled
File Delegate method for you,
which will create a
new untitled document.
And so this is something good to
add to your app if you want to be
sophisticated about this handling.
So we have changed the app
packaging since Mac OS X Server.
In fact, we changed it twice.
So this was what we had in
Mac OS X Server and in DP1.
Texted it to that app, texted it,
and resources.
In DP2, our heart was in the right place,
but we were a bit verbose.
We have support files, executables,
Mac OS X, TextEdit, resources.
And, I mean, again, the idea here was to
support multiple platforms,
multiple executables, and so on.
In DP3, we changed this around a bit to
make the path a little shorter,
but again,
the same functionality is available.
You can have multiple executables,
multiple platforms,
multiple localizations,
all the same functionality is in there.
So that's what we did in DP3.
Now, you might look at this and say,
"How do you support this?" Well,
those of you who use NSBundle know
NSBundle is your friend.
It will protect you from
all of these changes.
I think Scott Forstall
used a shoe store analogy,
which is pretty appropriate.
Good news is in DP4 we have not
changed the packaging format.
And the other good news is
Project Builder will build for you
the new packaging format by default.
So you go to Project Builder,
you create a new application, you build,
you get content/macOS/executable_name,
which is what you would want,
which is what the installed app will be.
The old Project Builder,
Project Builder Woe,
does not build the new format
unless you specify this bundle
style key in the make file.
And even then, it only builds it when
you do make install.
So if you're still using
the old make files,
the old Project Builder,
you might want to watch out for this.
Info.plist.
The Info.plist is, again,
used by old bundles.
You've probably heard about it
many times in many sessions.
It's present in all the app packages,
Carbon or Cocoa.
It's now an XML file.
And the good news is the
values for these now can be
directly set in Project Builder,
instead of having to create a
custom Info.plist and so on.
There's an application settings
pane which lets you set these.
So some of the updated keys,
some of the changes that
are important to you as app
developers are the CFBundle name.
This is the short name
for your application.
And this is the thing that appears
in the menu bar as your app name.
And again,
even if your application is called
foobar.exe or if it's called
Adobe Photoshop TM version 5.4,
you know, you should come up with some
short name that allows you to
just clearly show what the app is
without taking up too much room.
This string is also shown in the
About panel when the About panel
is brought up if you're using it.
The CFBundle identifier is a new key.
This is, again, you've heard about this,
I'm sure.
It's the unique identifier, Java style.
It's--one important thing about
this is not only does it uniquely
identify your bundle so you can
sort through the various bundles,
it will also be used by user
defaults as the app domain name.
So instead of saving user
defaults under the name TextEdit,
we'll save them under com.apple.com.
And then we'll also
have the file.textEdit,
which reduces the chances
of conflicts between various
apps and various companies.
And finally, we have CFBundle icon file,
which represents the icon
for your application.
And this is now an ICNS file.
Talking about ICNS files,
icons are now represented as ICNS files.
I think there's a session on ICNS files
and the various services that support it.
ICNS files have multiple representations,
128 by 128, which we're saying required
because it's possible that 128 by
128 icons appear in the desktop,
in your dock and so on,
and you want it to look nice.
We're also recommending 32 by 32.
And I think also 16 by 16,
you can even add that as well,
and that might appear in
the list mode in Finder.
So these ICNS files have been, you know,
it hasn't been obvious how
to create these in the past.
I think there are multiple solutions now.
One of them,
which is on your Mac OS X DP4 CD,
is the Icon Composer app,
which I'll show you.
Then there's a command line tool.
You can take a multi-component TIFF file,
use this command line tool and
get a multi-component ICNS file.
And there are some third-party
solutions that are actually now
out there and they are pretty good.
And you would also specify... In addition
to the app icon... You would also specify
the document icons the same way and you
would specify them in your Info.plist.
Okay, so now I'll show you Icon Composer.
Slides please.
Okay, so Icon Composer.
It's in System Developer Applications.
There you go.
Let's also bring up a Finder window.
We are in our home directory.
Okay, so I have a bunch of images here.
Let's look at this one.
There you go.
That looks like a nice icon.
So we'll drag that to this bucket here.
Now note that, because this image is much
bigger than 128 by 128,
it asks me whether it
should use a scaled version,
and we'll say yes, and it puts it here.
Now we should also maybe specify
this as the large version,
the 32 by 32,
so let's drag this one in there as well.
Now you don't have to do this.
I'm actually,
if you're going to use the same one,
you don't have to do this.
But I'm showing that this one actually
might be a bit too small at 32 by 32.
You can't really tell, you know,
that cute little face.
So I have another cat image here.
If we look at it,
you'll see that it's just the head,
so maybe we'll drag that one in there.
There you go.
So now we have an ICNS thing,
ICNS file with two components in it.
Let's save this file.
In our home directory or
in our documents directory,
we'll save it as cat picture.icns.
Now one question that comes up often is,
well, how do you use this icon?
Let's go ahead and also
attempt to do that.
Go into Project Builder,
create a new project,
new Cocoa application.
Let's call it Test App.
I'm not going to do anything
to the app except add an icon.
Well, first thing is we have to go ahead
and in our resources add the file.
So go to our Documents folder,
catpicture.icns.
It should be added to our resources.
Okay, now we go into our targets,
click on the test app,
Go to Application Settings,
and this is where you're
specifying Info.plist keys,
and we're simply going to specify that
we want cat.picture.icns to be the icon.
Let's just build.
Let's see where this goes.
Okay, it's done.
So let's run this.
Here's our app.
If you look in the doc, there it is,
Test App, and it has the cute little cat.
That wasn't as expected.
Now I'll show you one more thing.
Let's go back into... Where did
we put our test application?
Where did we put our test application?
Anybody remember?
Is it documents?
Okay.
I can't find my test application.
Well, that's okay.
We'll find it at some point.
I just can't.
Oh, I can go back into Project Builder.
Oh, it's in Tilda Test App.
Oh, okay.
Well,
is not showing it to us, but that's okay.
I think we all learned.
Okay, let's go back
Okay, so the graphics subsystem.
We talked about the graphics
subsystem at last WWDC,
and obviously the impact of removing
DPS and putting Quartz in its place.
And a lot of that stuff was actually
fairly well scoped out last time.
We have Beziapath APIs, NSImage APIs,
and so on.
So a lot of that stuff is in place.
Two new things that we've
added since then is,
one is the PDF image rep,
which we talked about last time,
and the other one is some changes in
NSImage that are fairly interesting.
NSPDF image rep, it is an image rep,
as you can imagine.
It loads and displays PDF images.
That's it.
So it's fairly simple.
Allows NSImage to do the same.
You can set the page number.
As you know,
PDF files can have multiple pages,
and you can tell PDF image rep,
set page 14, get the page count,
as you might expect.
Now, note that each page...
Each page in a PDF image rep has
a...can have a different size.
So that's something to watch
out for if you're actually
flipping through the pages.
Now, if you use a PDF image rep through
NSImage and just composite,
you'll get only the first page.
Quartz has the ability to,
if you have some backing store,
some memory,
it can composite from that memory
using certain compositing operations.
And that's pretty good,
because that means if you have some image
that you actually want to composite,
you no longer have to create an
NSWindow backing store for it,
which is something
NSImage would do for you,
but would occupy extra memory.
So NSImage will now avoid creating
that backing store window if it can.
And that depends on a few, you know,
what compositing mode you're using,
where the image came from, and so on.
But it will avoid creating,
it will not create that cache if it can.
Now, if you find that this is impacting
your applications because you were
somehow relying on it being cached,
you can actually do so by calling
lockFocus unlockFocus first.
Of course, if you call lockFocus as an
execution of your application,
the image will be cached,
because that is what you wanted.
There are a few other things
that will make it cached.
Which are implicit in the API.
But if you find that your application,
your images aren't showing,
this is one thing you might want
to check into to see whether
this caching is causing that.
We haven't found any problems so far,
but who knows.
OpenGL is another new feature
in the DP4 and in the Mac OS X.
In DP4, OpenGL comes in several forms,
several libraries.
The OpenGL.framework is the
basic OpenGL functionality,
all of the OpenGL APIs and so on.
I believe these are in terms
of core graphics concepts.
There's also a Glut.framework.
For those of you who know Glut,
Glut is the higher application
model for OpenGL applications.
Glut is actually implemented using Cocoa,
but because it's its
own application model,
if you use Glut, you shouldn't be using
Cocoa concepts in such an app.
It's basically its own complete little
framework for writing applications.
There's also the AGL.framework,
which is the AppleGL APIs.
Those APIs allow a Carbon app to
execute OpenGL on both 9 and 10.
Okay.
We've added two new classes to the kit:
OpenGL View and OpenGL Context.
OpenGL View is a subclass of
View for rendering OpenGL.
It's fairly straightforward.
In such a view, you can only do OpenGL.
You can't mix it with 2D drawing.
You basically override drawRect
and in there do OpenGL.
OpenGL Context is a more low-level
access to the OpenGL concepts.
There you can do more stuff with OpenGL,
like create a full-screen
window and so on,
and change and tweak
some other parameters.
I'll show you a quick demo of this.
I think those of you who've been to...
We've been to Dave Springer's
talk on OpenGL.
You might have also seen a similar demo.
So, let's hide terminal there.
We don't want that.
OpenGL.
So we'll run this application.
So there you go.
Basically, this is a Cocoa application.
In there is an OpenGL view
that draws a teapot,
and you can, with an NS slider,
control the aspects of that teapot.
You can make it filled if you want.
If you want to change the pattern,
use color.
So there you go.
Fairly straightforward.
You might ask, how about patterns?
Well, this demo doesn't support that,
but you saw something quite powerful
with OpenGL and patterns in Steve's demo,
so you can actually go ahead and do that.
I thought I would show
you the code for this.
Let's close that.
Okay.
Okay, so there you go.
It's basically a pretty
small application.
We have a subclass of the OpenGL view.
In it with frame,
we're setting a few parameters.
We'll probably get rid of the
need to do this in the future.
In Awake from Nib,
we basically make the current
context and we set some parameters
about OpenGL that we want set.
And then these are the
target action methods.
Set fill mode basically
gets the fill mode.
And set needs display, yes,
as you would be doing in 2D drawing.
Set object color gets the color.
It converts to RGB properly.
And then it goes ahead and sets
the color in the OpenGL context and
also then says set needs display.
Set X angle, set Y angle are connected to
the sliders we showed you.
and the draw-rec basically goes
ahead and draws either a solid
teapot or a wire teapot based
on the setting of the fill flag.
So this is a fairly new feature,
fairly fresh.
Use it.
Let us know how it works for you,
and let us know if there are
any other additional features
or bugs that you encounter.
Okay, slides please.
Okay, so Umbrella Frameworks.
You've heard about Umbrella
Frameworks in other contexts,
I think.
The concept behind Umbrella
Frameworks is to simplify the
developer view of Mac OS X.
Here's what Umbrella
frameworks look like.
The concept is simple.
If you're writing a BSD POSIX tool,
you link against system.framework.
If you're writing a tool that needs
to use core foundation or Carbon core,
file manager, resource manager, CFBundle,
I'm sorry, so on, you would link against
core services framework,
which will, of course, bring in system.
Application services brings all of
the graphics capabilities and so on.
So if you have a back-end
server that just does graphics
but doesn't have any UI,
you would link against core services.
That might be the layer for you.
Finally,
if you're a Cocoa app or a Carbon app,
you link against one of the
top-level frameworks up there.
Now, why do we make such a big
deal of Umbrella frameworks?
Well, because in reality,
it turns out that we have many,
many frameworks in the system.
So here is what the
situation might look like.
Some break into three,
some break into five,
some break into six.
Actually, the real picture is a lot
more complicated than that.
So actual contents may vary.
We don't want you to link against app.
We don't want you to link against
the toolkit or foundation directly.
We don't want you to link
against the HTML framework or
the HLTV toolbox or Quick Draw,
because those all bring
in other frameworks.
And it's not clear that they will
bring in the frameworks that--let's
say you bring--let's say you
link against a framework which,
as a side effect,
brings another framework.
It's not clear that that framework will
always continue bringing that framework.
So if you're taking advantage of these
implicit bringing-ins of frameworks,
your app might crash in a certain update.
The idea is that these top-level
frameworks have a charter,
and if you link against them,
your application should continue working
no matter how the contents change.
So we'd like you to use this picture.
Now, as a Cocoa application,
you should link against Cocoa.framework,
which is the new framework,
the new Umbrella framework.
Cocoa framework in DP4 brings
with it AppKit and foundation,
and it should also bring
in scripting at some point,
which we'll do.
And that will sort of be the core
Cocoa frameworks on the system.
Cocoa also brings in
the frameworks below it:
application services and core services.
It also brings in some sub-frameworks
from the Carbon framework,
because obviously in the
implementation of the AppKit,
we rely on some Carbon features.
However,
we don't bring in all of that blue box.
We just bring in some
of the sub-frameworks.
So don't rely on Carbon being there
in the context of a Cocoa app.
Just some pieces are there.
So if you do need to use
any Carbon APIs that are
in the Carbon.framework,
also link against the
Carbon.framework yourself.
Now one thing to watch out
for is name collisions.
Currently,
we still have a single-level namespace.
Meaning if any library defines a
function that's the same as a function
you defined in your application,
that is an error.
And the Carbon framework,
because of some legacy APIs,
has a lot of APIs which
do not have prefixes,
and which might actually
be fairly commonly named.
So if you find your app not
running after you build it on 10,
that's one of the things to look at.
And you'll usually get a warning from the
loader that this symbol had a collision.
So now we'll quickly talk about some
other changes that we've introduced.
User defaults.
User defaults now supports new types,
NSNumber and NSState.
Now one thing to note is,
before we only had strings,
in addition to data array and dictionary.
So when you wrote a number out,
it would actually be
written out as a string.
So if you, for instance,
did set integer for key,
and then you called object for key,
you would get back a NSString.
If you happened to assume
that was an NSString,
now that might break.
This is probably something
most people don't run into,
but it's a good warning in any case.
The defaults command has been enhanced
with some of these new options.
One thing you can now do is
specify host-specific preferences.
Defaults host hostname will let you
set a preference for a given host.
-currenthost will let you set a
preference for this current host,
so you don't have to know the name.
Now note that user defaults
does not have API to set or get
host-based preferences based on host.
We don't think it's a feature
that will be widely used at all,
so we don't think it's
necessary to expose that API.
However, if there is a host-specific
thing stored in there,
for instance as a result of
printing subsystem or whatever,
user defaults will correctly
fetch it and give it to you.
The defaults command,
some of the other enhancements,
you can now write --int, --float,
--bool to explicitly specify the type.
--array allows you to specify
arrays as the values and keys,
and that's actually better than trying to
remember the syntax from the olden days.
Another good feature is the array add,
which adds to an existing array without
having to repeat all the elements.
So these are some pretty nifty features.
You can use read type as an option
to see the type of a given key,
and you can also say defaults help,
and it'll give you all of
the options that are there.
So, text has a few new features.
One of them is the inline, as you type,
spelling checking.
Now, as you can imagine,
this uses the existing mechanisms.
We had a spelling checking API with
a possibility to plug in third-party
spell checkers in the back end.
It uses exactly the same mechanisms.
By default, it's off, but it just takes,
you know, calling
setContinuousSpellCheckingEnabled,
yes, to enable it in the
context of any text object.
And you also have a toggle method
you might connect to a menu item.
The text system can now open
Mac OS 8.9 simple text documents.
So these documents can either be plain
or they can have a resource fork which
indicates attributes on the text.
So all of the text storage methods
that read documents will now correctly
understand simple text documents.
So you can actually try this in TextEdit,
open old simple text documents.
Now one thing we don't do is
we don't export this format,
so you can't save this format.
If you try to save, you'll be warned,
you'll get a warning that it
should be RTF when you're saving.
We've also added a new method in
text to sort of group together a
lot of the reading functionality
and to be more efficient.
You specify a URL to read the file from,
you specify some options,
and in return you get back the info
about the document you just read.
The thing here is that it can also
read into an existing text storage,
which is pretty nice.
You might not have to tear down your text
storage when you're loading a document.
The options dictionary,
the second argument,
can include the base URL,
a default character encoding,
default attributes, and so on.
So what this means is,
let's say you have a file,
and you just want to read it.
You could specify that it should
be assumed to be Mac Roman,
however if the text system figures
out that it was something else,
it will use it instead.
Now to find out what
encoding it really was,
it will be returned to
you in the third argument,
document attributes.
And this comes in handy when you're
doing sophisticated encoding handling.
like text edit actually allows you to do.
The Document Attributes dictionary will
also return to you the document type,
which will tell you whether it was HTML,
RTF, and so on.
And so based on that,
you can make some decisions.
Okay, input management.
Input management for
Asian keyboards and stuff,
you know,
when you switch to another input method,
start typing Japanese,
that now goes through the
text services manager,
which is shared facility
under Carbon and Cocoa,
which means the same input management
menu now works for Cocoa and Carbon apps,
and you can switch keyboards and
stuff using the same facilities.
Then the good news here
is the Cocoa APIs have not
changed or been impacted,
so they will continue working.
Tooltips.
We now add a feature,
the ability to do finer
granularity tooltips.
What I mean by that is,
as you can see here, thank you,
some tooltip fans out there.
Yeah, before you could have one
tooltip for the whole view,
and that was it.
So now you can have
tooltips on each cell,
which is fairly good.
You can also have more dynamic tooltips.
You can say, here's a rect.
I want to track tooltips in this rect.
So whenever a tooltip
is supposed to come up,
meaning the mouse enters that
area and hovers for a while,
the owner that's specified
there will get a call,
that the method you see down below,
that says give me the string
to show in this tooltip.
And that allows you to
basically do dynamic tooltips,
for instance,
if the value of that field is changing,
or whether you have to load some
key from a localization file,
this allows you to delay that, and so on.
So it's, it's fairly fancy.
Okay, so that's it as far as the
changes I'm going to talk about.
You can refer to the release notes.
We have a lot of information in there.
The appkit.html release note,
which I opened here,
shows the DP4 changes, since DP3 to DP4.
We also have another
file that's fairly big.
It contains all of the changes since,
I believe, next step 3.3, really, but,
you know, little summaries in there.
It's called appkit-pre-dp4.html.
Not everything in here is documented,
so you might want to scan through
this file backwards to make,
you know, when you're looking at
certain changes in classes,
to make sure you don't miss anything.
Foundation.html is also a release note
that refers to foundation changes.
We also have examples, as you know,
in System Developer, examples.
Texted and Sketch are pretty
up-to-date with lots of new features.
So you can, for instance,
look at Texted as an example
of full use of Sheets,
and so on.
Okay, so let's talk a little bit
about upcoming changes.
So Aqua Polish,
if you went to Don Lindsay's
talk on Aqua on Monday,
he definitely referred to some areas
of Aqua that still need tweaking,
polish, and so on.
One of those areas is the
single window mode enhancements.
We have some ideas on how to make
single window mode work better,
and if it requires new APIs or whatever,
we'll certainly be introducing
them as soon as possible.
Also, if you notice, the farewells,
about boxes, a few of the components do
not yet have an Aqua look,
which will be introduced.
Hopefully this doesn't impact
your code at all in any way.
Also, the sheet handling APIs,
we might have to add sheet handling
APIs in a few other places,
and maybe NSDocument also will
need to get a few methods.
We haven't quite enumerated
the whole set yet.
Now,
the set that's there should be enough
for you to get started on using sheets.
Now other stuff we're looking at,
and this is not coming necessarily
next month or in the next three
months or next update or whatever,
but these are in our queue.
These are important to us and we want
to get these to you at some point.
More Carbon and Java integration.
Ability to put Carbon widgets,
Carbon panels in Cocoa apps.
Ability to put Java beans, for instance,
in Cocoa apps.
These are important and
we're looking at this.
I used to be able to do
this in Mac OS X Server.
We now have a totally
new Java infrastructure,
so we have to plug into that.
QuickTime.
NSMovieView is not working in DP4,
but that will certainly be
working as soon as possible.
In addition, we'll be looking at other
QuickTime integrations.
For instance, for image formats beyond
what NSImage can support,
we want to go to QuickTime and
load all the image formats that
QuickTime supports for you.
XMLNibs.
If you heard about the
Carbon support in Ivy,
we're using XMLNibs there.
We definitely plan to use that
for Cocoa applications as well.
Don't know the timeframe.
Scripting.
We support scripting strongly.
There are certain areas where
we haven't gotten into yet,
recordability being one of them.
So we're certainly thinking
about changes in those areas.
Better internationalization.
I get this question often
and it's definitely something
near and dear to my heart.
I definitely want to do this.
Basically,
the ability of the text system to
do bidirectional text and use some
of the more advanced features of
the Apple text group is on our plate
and we plan to deliver that to you.
deliver that to you.
Okay, so in summary,
basically there are a lot
of advancements in Cocoa,
and most of them you will get for free.
We talked about some of those,
and some require adoption,
so you have to do some work to get those.
One good thing is many of the apps
in Mac OS X are written in Cocoa,
and we intend to keep on
going that way because Cocoa,
as you know, is giving us a good boost
in productivity and so on,
so that's a good thing for us.
We also have a lot of
enhancements and additional
features planned in the future.
So the group, the Cocoa group,
the people who work on
AppKit and Foundation,
the group has grown recently.
It's a highly energized group,
and we're really excited
about working on these.
Okay, before I go to the roadmap,
I have a question.
Who knows what this is?
Who knows what's an optical disc for?
This is TextArt by
Stone Design Corporation,
shipped in 1989, I believe.
So, you know, I found this recently,
and the amazing thing is, you know,
this shipped, I think,
very soon after Next Step 1.0 came out.
It's a fully, you know, shrink-wrapped,
I believe it was shrink-wrapped, right?
I mean, this is pre-the program
that came before Create?
Anyway, so it was shrink-wrapped,
high-quality, you know, nice program,
and it shipped very soon after
we shipped the next system.
And, you know,
and despite the media cost of $50.
So, anyway, and so since, you know,
this has come out,
we've undergone a lot of changes.
Cocoa has, you know...
We've developed it over the years,
and especially in the last few years,
the opportunities are now great.
We have a lot of Apple technologies,
QuickTime, scripting,
we're integrating into Cocoa.
I think those are very exciting.
A lot of things that we weren't
able to give you before.
And obviously the potential for
the millions of desktops that
Mac OS X will be on someday,
I think that's really exciting
for developers who are thinking
of doing third-party applications,
who are already doing them,
who are looking forward to shipping
out the shrink-wrapped version.
So I know that there are a lot
of you who have been thinking of
doing third-party applications
or doing vertical applications,
and there are some of you
who are probably brand new,
who are just looking at
Cocoa for the first time.
Anyway,
I'd really like a round of applause
for all of the Cocoa developers who
stuck with us throughout the years
and who just watched Cocoa grow.
It's really your energy that keeps us
going at Apple and the Cocoa group.
We're really excited
to see everybody here.
The roadmap for sessions that
you might be interested in:
the Cocoa Overview and Cocoa In-Depth.
Those are the two sessions that
basically cover Cocoa basics
and some not-so-basics,
but basically for people who haven't
necessarily seen Cocoa before.
The Overview happened yesterday.
The Depth is tomorrow.
Using Interface Builder tomorrow morning,
where they'll talk about some of the
Carbon features and some of the new
features they've added for Cocoa.
The Quartz session will talk about the
Quartz public APIs that you can use.
That's on Friday.
And the Aqua Feedback Forum is on Friday.
That's likely to be
somewhat exciting as well,
with various people expressing
their pleasure at Aqua.
Okay, so what did I do with the clicker?
There it is.
Okay.
Okay,
and so you can contact David Wright.
We're also setting up a mailing list,
coco-feedback@group.apple.com.
If you have any feedback or
comments about the API changes
in AppKit or Foundation,
please send mail to that list.
I haven't quite verified it's set up yet,
so don't do it in the next hour,
but it should be there in a day or two.
Okay, so I think I'm going to
invite the QA team up.